Update conda-store explanations (#726)
conda-incubator/conda-store: docusaurus-docs/conda-store/explanations/conda-store-concepts.md

---
sidebar_position: 2
description: Overview of some conda-store concepts
---

# conda-store concepts

conda-store was developed with two key goals in mind: reliable reproducibility of environments, and features for collaboratively using an environment.
This page describes how conda-store achieves these goals.

## Reproducibility

In the [conda-based environment creation process][conda-concepts-env-creation], there are two areas where runtime reproducibility is improved through conda-store:

* Auto-tracking when an `environment.yaml` (which is created and updated manually) file has changes. This can be easily tracked by taking a sha256 of the file, which is what conda-store does but sorts the dependencies to make sure it has a way of not triggering a rebuild if the order of two packages changes in the dependencies list.

> * In step (2) `repodata.json` is updated regularly. When conda solves for a user's environment it tries to use the latest version of each package. Since `repodata.json` could be updated the very next minute, the same solve for the same
> `environment.yaml` file can result in different solves. To enable reproducibility, conda-store auto-generates certain artifacts like lockfiles and tarballs that capture the actual versions of packages and can be used reliably re-create the same environment. Learn more about them in the [artifacts documentation][artifacts].

Reviewer: I know that conda-store handles this by downloading/keeping `repodata.json` up to date, but another way to talk about this without getting into too many implementation details is to say that conda channels get updated with new package versions regularly, for example:

```suggestion
* When a user creates an environment, conda tries to use the latest version of each package requested in the environment specification. Conda channels are constantly being updated with new package versions, so the same solve for the same `environment.yaml` file can result in different dependencies being downloaded. To enable reproducibility, conda-store auto-generates certain artifacts like lockfiles and tarballs that capture the actual versions of packages and can be used reliably re-create the same environment. Learn more about them in the [artifacts documentation][artifacts].
```

## Namespaces

Namespaces are how conda-store manages environment access for groups of users.

Every environment in conda-store is a part of a "namespace", and is displayed in the format: `<namespace>/<environment-name>`.

Users can have access to view/edit/manage certain "namespaces", which means they have that level of permission for all the environments in that namespace.
This allows a large team or organization to have isolated spaces for environment sharing between smaller groups.

Each individual user has a separate namespace, which has the same name as their username (used while logging in). All environments in this namespace are private to the individual.

A user can be a part of several other "shared" namespaces, and based on the level of access given to them, they can view and use the environment, edit the environment, or delete it all together. The permission are dictated by "role mappings".

> ## Role mappings

Author: TODO

Author: @peytondmurray - We can add the permissions for each role in this section

<!-- TODO -->

- Viewer
- Developer (to be changed to Editor)
- Admin

> ## Environment versions

Reviewer: I know I talked about this before, but internally we refer to different environment versions as "builds". It might be a good time to update the documentation to match, what do you think?

Author: done!

conda-store always re-builds an environment from scratch when edits are detected, which is required for ensuring truly reproducible environments.
Version control is very useful in any collaborative setting, and environments are no exception.

> Hence, conda-store keeps older versions of the environment for reference, and allows you to select different versions when needed. conda-store-ui also provides a graphical way to [switch between versions][conda-store-ui-version-control].

Reviewer: I think here it would be nice to state that the user can always revert to a previous build at any time. This is one of the key defining features of conda-store that you can't get anywhere else, so we should be say it loudly here!
